I'm going to play the piano.
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turboville.
Last week you met Lieutenant General P.K. Carlton
and heard the incredible story of how what he hoped was going to be a career
as an Air Force pilot.
Became instead a career of perhaps even grander service
as a medical surgeon who helped create and implement a vision
for landmark breakthroughs in the care and survival of military men and women
who have in the past are now and will certainly in the future
put themselves in harm's way in defense of our country.
We will continue today to hear those stories.
But for most of this 30 minutes, General Carlton will talk about three Navy men,
Craig Powell, Dave Tarantino, and Dave Thomas.
And about a span of 19 minutes when their four paths met
at the Spotted Terrace, flew American Flight 77 into the Pentagon,
11 September 2001.
Please welcome back to Veterans of the Valley, Lieutenant General P.K. Carlton,
who since 2002 has served as director of Homeland Security for the Texas A&M Health Science Center.
General Carlton, welcome back.
It was a fascinating visit that we had last week.
And I want to pick up sort of where we left off.
You have been a medical doctor most of your career after a failed flight physical
said that you could not be a pilot back when you were at the Air Force Academy.
And you decided to become a doctor and that's where your path has taken you.
Talk about in 1999 when you became the 17th Surgeon General of the United States Air Force.
How did your path get there?
And what was your job in Washington at bowling Air Force Base
which right across the street from the Pentagon?
Yes, the Surgeon General of the Air Force is the chief doc for the Air Force,
is the way to think about it.
Right.
Is in charge of organizing and training and equipping.
And so as we look at how the Air Force, the Army, the Navy, each of us does it a little bit differently,
but basically the same, it's how do we present our forces?
My forces indeed were the medical forces that then would support the line of the Army, Navy, and Air Force.
And my particular part of the Air was air evacuation.
Right.
And so that was my job.
It also involved how do we do peace-time health care, how do we balance a budget, how do we interact with the Congress,
a whole variety of other things, but it was to look around the corners for what's coming in the future,
how can we prepare for them, and then to execute the medical program for 79 different facilities,
which we had throughout the United States and overseas at that time.
Right.
You told me at one time, when we were visiting that back in the 90s, there were people that were saying,
hey, you know, we're not going to need this, we're not going to go to war again.
And then in 2001, 2002, that all changed, of course.
And in February of 2001, February of 2001, we're talking now.
I want you to talk about a discussion that you were having with a colleague in the Pentagon.
And the discussion came to mind.
And this goes back to what we were talking about last week about how you described your job as looking around corners,
conceiving of the inconceivable.
And sort of how that relates to just sort of the happenstance conversation, how it came about one day in February of 2001.
Well, I was walking from one place to another, and the clinic commander,
where the Pentagon Clinic came up to me and said, we've got to do an exercise.
And he started to describe what his plans were, and then he had to be quiet,
because we had an airplane go overhead, and we couldn't hear each other.
And he looked at me and said, well, why don't we just do an airplane, hits the Pentagon?
Loses an engine on takeoff from Ronald Reagan, the North airport.
Takes a bunch of birds, it's not a far out scenario.
And crashes with a minimal controllable airspeed into the Pentagon, medics you're up.
I said, I'll buy. Please do.
And so that exercise we accomplished in May, we did it as a tabletop, we had pictures of it.
The airplane came to rest in the Cingric Court yard, and we learned a number of lessons.
We, number one, didn't evacuate well, we didn't have a good evacuation plan.
We didn't have evacuation plans for our special needs people.
We didn't have equipment, we didn't have training.
We didn't have a variety of things that we needed for our medical teams that we thought we should need.
And we decided that our get well date would be one September.
Right.
So when the event occurred on 11 September, I was in my boss's office, the vice chief staff,
and went down to the clinic to pick up a medical team thinking that the toughest place to be
would be in the Cingric Court yard because you couldn't get out.
And as I grabbed a protective vest to put on, the young man beside me said,
General, why are you making us do this again?
Now you don't normally get challenged by a two striper at a three star level,
but I responded to him and he said, well, I'm not making you do it again.
Did you learn something last time?
He said, yeah, I know how to handle this.
I said great, and stick like glue to me, because this is the real thing.
Take a deep breath. That's real smoke.
This is for real.
And in fact, that young man put me out when I caught on fire.
I want to back up just a second.
You arrived to work that day.
You get your figure to be a normal day of work.
You had your list of things to do, what you were going to accomplish that day.
And I think you said that you were in a meeting of some sort at the time,
when somebody turned on the television.
And you said that immediately you knew where most of the country, most of the media,
when the first plane hit the first tower in New York, that the people in that room knew
that that was not a system that had accidentally hit the World Trade Center.
You knew more than that.
Yes. In that room, which was the chief of staff, the vice chief,
all of the senior Air Force people in the Washington DC area,
it was very obvious that was no accident.
That was not an navigational error.
Yes.
And that we had a real problem.
They did not interrupt the meeting immediately, but instead waited a couple of minutes,
and so literally we watched that one, the first impact,
and then real footage came through the show, the second impact on the second tower.
Exactly.
And so at that point, our boss said, General Manor at War,
and it was very apparent that we had a problem.
Right.
Indeed.
You were on the other side of the Pentagon, from the impact area,
but you knew immediately because you said that you could feel the vibration,
you could feel the shutter.
Yes.
And the smoke was coming through the air conditioning system.
On the opposite side of the Pentagon, more than a half a mile away,
the Pentagon shook from the impact, and the smoke spread immediately.
And so we knew we had a problem.
Right.
Take it from there.
You went to the center of the courtyard with the team, reported to the fire chief.
I'm ready to accept casualties, because as your job,
you're in charge of medicine for the Air Force.
Take it from there.
You gathered four guys together, they got letters, and you headed to where?
Yes.
Well, the job in who's in charge becomes extremely important.
And fire is always in charge.
Right.
Because they have the best situation awareness of what's going on in any given activity.
So I reported into the fire chief and said, I'm ready to receive casualties.
How can I help you?
And just as this fire chief started explaining to me, he didn't know where they were.
A young text sergeant came out of the door, standing next to the fire chief,
and said, you want to see where the die is, come with me.
We can maybe save some.
So I grabbed the four people closest to me, volunteered them to get a letter.
And took a letter team then down the four corridor.
And the Pentagon is a complex structure, five individual buildings,
each of a shape of a Pentagon, a five-sided building, five rings.
Connected by corridors, one through twelve.
So we went down the four corridor, which happened to the ABCD and the,
because you're going to be saying some letters here in a moment.
Yes.
And I want people to, most people have seen the aerial view of the Pentagon.
They know what it looks like.
But it's five rings from the inside out, ABCD and E.
That is correct.
Go ahead.
A is the center, and E is the outer, or the view lots, if you will.
So we headed down the four corridor, went through ABC.
And when we penetrated the D circle, or the D ring,
it was on fire.
The airplane had impacted between four and five corridors.
And so we could not proceed on into the D ring, came out of D,
and there was an alleyway there called the AE corridor, came into that area.
And as soon as we could see, the first thing I saw was a woman that was airborne
that had jumped off one of the upper stories, turned out it was the fifth story.
Trying to get away from the fire, the fires of terrifying thing.
And this huge man caught her.
And when he caught her and understand even in this woman was probably a slight woman, a hundred, ten hundred and twenty pound,
still knocked him right on his case, he was flat.
But as he's laying on his back, another woman jumps out the same window.
And he had the presence of mine to turn turtle, and hit her just as hard as he could,
as she went by, which gave her horizontal vector instead of a vertical vector.
Unfortunately, it also gave him a face plan.
So he impacted his face on the concrete side wall that was there.
Popped right up, came to me and said, Sir, am I glad you're here?
Soluted and reported in.
And I thought, Oh man, I'm not in Kansas anymore.
This is no uniform on.
He was not officially clocked in, even at that time.
I guess he was going to, he went into wherever their lockers are to put on his uniform because he was in shorts and a tank top.
He was in shorts and a tank top.
He was very obviously a physical specimen, even with a bloody face.
Very obviously a physical specimen turned out he was a Navy seal.
Navy seal, Craig Powell.
Craig Powell.
Yes.
He reported in and said, Sir, I heard screaming right in this area and he pointed to a hole from which fire was coming out.
And headed to Bripile that went up to about six or seven feet.
And the fire came jetting out across to the opposite wall and then bounced up into the air.
He said, we've got to go in that hole.
I think we can get some more survivors.
What was the size of the hole because it turned out as you found out later that the hole was created by the landing gear.
Yes. The hole was created by the landing gear and actually the landing gear was on fire just beyond where he was standing.
And so we're standing in the shadow of the hole and it's probably 12 by 12 feet.
I couldn't quite reach the top.
Right.
Couldn't side to side reach either side.
We're going to see a photograph of it in a moment.
But I want you to describe this.
Yes.
As he's describing this, I've heard people scream as recently as five minutes ago to other people came from the adjacent corridor,
or the five corridor and burrowed right through the debris pile into that hole.
Well, at that point, there's not a question of their life people and we just saw it go in.
So we formed a line to follow in behind them and pass the debris that they were passing out at that time so that we could gain entrance into this as it turns out it's the Navy Com Center, the communication center.
Right.
Immediately inside, we were very fortunate to find two women that had collapsed from smoke inhalation and when we picked them up, they were all attached.
And so we passed them out.
It was a rather surreal experience as I'm passing this woman out and understand you can't stand up, you can't crawl because there's fire all around.
So you're kind of in a hard squat as low as you can be because the lower you are means you can breathe.
And this woman revived literally as I'm maybe two inches from her and probably I scared her to death.
But these two women were very fortunate they had gone down fairly recently.
And so just the hassle of passing them out revived them.
It became very apparent to me that this was a very hostile place.
The man in front of me went down from smoke inhalation.
We passed him out.
I went deeper into the building and found out that you just couldn't breathe at all.
I came back out and said, I want you to strip.
I need your t-shirt, your t-shirt, your t-shirt, so come.
And we then had what t-shirts to breathe through.
That really was my contribution in this discussion.
Passed those to the team members that were inside.
And then I caught a glimpse of a gentleman with his, just his face.
And remember you can't see very well.
But the fire is a remarkable brightness and I saw him under three waterfalls.
There was a waterfall of fire coming from the roof onto a bookcase.
Then it ran down the bookcase, then waterfalls onto a table.
And he was immediately under the table.
And then it went down the table and waterfalls off the end of the table.
And so it was a very surreal experience.
But all I could see was a face and I didn't know if he was connected to a body or not.
So I hit him with a wet t-shirt.
He shook about the time that the man in front of me tried to lift the table, could not.
He pushed the fire out of the way, got on his back, did a leg press, and said, go get him.
And so it was apparent at that time that Jerry Henson, who was a retired naval officer, was alive.
A million at the time.
And the man that was doing the leg lift is David Tarotino.
David Tarotino happened to be a Navy physician.
Right, right.
And he was along with Dave Thomas.
Yes.
Those were the two that had penetrated the briefout.
Dave Tarotino gave me about four inches to get at this man.
I got at him, invited him in my most polite military voice to come my way.
And he did about six, eight inches enough for me to get a hand on him.
And then I could pull him out and we passed him out.
Then I got under the table with my colleague that had done the leg press.
The most concerning thing I had at that point was this table is going to collapse and catch my friend.
And so I wedged a fire extinguisher under the table.
He relaxed in the table, didn't come down.
I got under the table with him and he said, there's more to the right.
And let's see if we can still hear them.
So we try to get everybody quiet.
That was the noise level was increasing for reasons that we didn't understand.
So we told everybody to be quiet.
The noise level didn't go down.
But as this is going on, people are passing me things.
They pass me a fire extinguisher.
They pass me a flashlight.
They pass me a mask so that we could begin to breathe again.
So I give those to Tarotino.
And both of us then are trying to figure out how to put our mask on when we can't see.
But in the very low levels with a flashlight, with a fire extinguisher and with a mask,
we have the potential to see, to breathe, and then to take effective action with the fire extinguishers.
So we were, thought we were king of the hill.
We told everybody to be quiet.
And in fact, the noise got louder, which we didn't understand.
And then I heard a voice that said, get out.
And I left a man in charge, the man in shorts, that I had described to you.
Craig Palt.
I left him in charge outside.
I told him to stay outside because he didn't have clothing in to go into a burning building.
And unbeknownst to me, he had come in and evacuated our team that was to the left looking for more survivors.
And then came back in again because he was, he was uncertain about why the noise level was increasing.
He thought the building was collapsing.
So he came to get us.
And so as he came into the building, into the room with us, he, he felt with his hands to see what's overhead.
We were in a wire enclosure, the ultimate insecurity is a, then a room within a room that is a solid wire enclosure.
As he reached up to feel that, it wasn't hot as he described it.
But the ceiling started to fall down.
He could feel the impact.
He then hit the big John pose and told us to get out.
Now.
In a louder voice.
Well, the first one was not very loud.
The second one was very loud, very imperative.
And I heard him very clearly.
And it was a different octave level.
It was a different urgency.
Yes.
And so I thought, you know, I don't know what's going on.
But I know I left somebody in charge.
Now they're telling me to get out.
They know something.
I don't know.
And so I grabbed Tarotino and said, we're out of here.
Pushed him towards what the direction we come, the hole.
And then I followed him down that little rabbit path towards the hole.
And all of a sudden, the guy behind me hit me hard.
I hit Tarotino hard and we all ended up in a ball in a lake, if you will,
the water that had accumulated in the A.E. quarter.
It turns out that was the pressure wave from the building collapsing.
Yes.
That focused in at the hole.
And blew us all out at the same time.
Yeah.
Could you describe that you, getting out on your own, you couldn't walk,
you couldn't crawl, you were literally churning.
Like you were trying to swim through the debris to get out.
Yes.
So you needed help and that push of air.
And you all out.
Yes.
Yeah.
And like you said, Powell, who you referred to as Big John,
and I think that's good, you were concerned that you had lost your team,
your original team of those four who had brought the letters
who had gone off to the left, left, while you had gone straight in.
But it turns out he had gone in and gotten them.
Yes.
And again, in any major event, you see your part of the world
and you have some idea of what happened from your memory.
But only when we got everybody together about two weeks later,
did we really find out who was on first, who was on second,
found out that what had gone on.
In fact, the second lady that he caught recovered,
I found out through my research, her name was Dr. Betty Maxwell,
who was worked there at the Pentagon.
We've got pictures.
And let's go to them right now.
And this is the whole that we talked about.
It was created by the landing gear.
And everything that you just talked about, that was it.
Yes.
Now picture this.
This is three days later.
Right.
Picture this.
There's a jet of straight fire that comes off the top three feet
and hits the opposite wall.
It's so strong.
And there's about, at higher than I level, a debris pile right across this,
the debris pile is also on fire.
So it was truly a vision of hell, if you will.
Let's move on.
These are pictures that I guess a lot of people have seen over the last eight years,
but just a reminder of the destruction.
And again, just to remind people, this is the section of the Pentagon that had just been renovated.
Right.
And it included structural steel and water.
And rebar, it had water where the Pentagon was not built that way.
And as you had told me as a matter of fact, that it actually hadn't been completed yet.
And normally, if it had been completed, there'd have been 5,000 people there in that area.
As it turned out, there were only a couple of hundred there, lost 125 of them.
But if there was any silver lining there is that there are not as many people
that could have been there at the time.
That's correct.
Let's move on.
This is an animation.
Talk about what we're looking at there.
What you're seeing is an animation of the Boeing 757, as it comes across,
just about to hit the building.
He has hit several light poles, one of which set his right engine on fire.
This shows you the diagrammatic picture.
He's in a little bit of a left hand bank.
By speed criteria, he's going 460 knots at this particular point.
And so this gives you a God's eye view to think about then the next picture,
which is an actual photograph of the impact sequence.
On the right, what you see approaching aircraft is actually the smoke tail.
You can see the nose of the aircraft just in front of that meter,
that is a parking meter, and you can see the tail just to the right and above the smoke line.
Now, one second later, you have the impact.
You can see the airplane literally disintegrating as it penetrates the building
and as it literally explodes.
This is from a security camera.
And people have seen these pictures before, but seeing them again, it's quite amazing.
It's amazing.
And pieces of the airplane were strewn all over the Pentagon grounds.
Right.
Now, this shows you in red the major damage and in blue the minor damage.
You can see it reflects the airplane exactly.
Now, if you'll notice, the airplane isn't a little bit of a left hand bank.
It follows the outline of the airplane exactly.
And in the subsequent airplane or picture, we will show you a perfectly circle hole.
Right.
That is right there.
That is the right engine.
Yeah.
If you look, if there's four arrows at the bottom of this picture,
the far right arrow is sort of pointing up towards what you can see is an imprint of the exact hole,
which is the size and the shape of a jet engine.
And that is where the right jet engine impacted into the building.
You can see that circular impact.
Incredible.
This is after the collapse.
A aerial view of the collapse of the Pentagon.
These are the people that we spoke about.
On the left is Navy officer David Tarantino.
On the right is David Thomas.
And Mr. Henson, the man that the three of you helped save is in the middle.
Yes, these became very good friends.
Dave Tarantino remains an active duty physician.
I put him in for the Medal of Honor from the American Medical Association.
And he was awarded that about a year later.
Right.
David Thomas has now been promoted to rear admiral and is the commander in Guantanamo Bay.
And Jerry Henson actually spent two days in the hospital but had no major injuries.
Incredible.
Absolutely incredible.
What you're describing took about 19 minutes and as I wrote on my notes here,
your day wasn't over.
This is still a working day for you.
Yes.
Your job was to, what you prepared for all your career was times like this.
To anticipate the unimaginable.
So you still had work to do.
So you, one thing I thought is that you're, your staff who had been kicked out of the Pentagon because of the security.
Was actually at your home.
Is that right?
Yes.
When you showed up at your home, they thought you were dead because you were reported four hours missing.
And your executive had reported that he had dropped you off to take an identification picture right at the point where the impact happened earlier in the morning at 9.30.
And, but luckily the picture was taken early and you were out of there by then.
Yes.
But your staff thought you were dead.
Yeah.
It actually was a little bit funny.
The staff's all there and I came upstairs.
I was a mess and you certainly don't give a briefing to your boss when you're a mess.
So my desire was to get an impression of form.
And all I saw was a bunch of jaws dropping people's faces turned white.
And they made a joke.
Hey, come on.
What do you guys think you mump off the three-starrier?
Everybody gets a promotion?
Come on.
We got work to do.
And in fact, I didn't realize that they'd been told that.
And fortunately, they hadn't told my wife.
So she wasn't so alarmed.
They gave me a kiss at the room and said, go get cleaned up.
You found out that you all were your duty as far as for immediate response was not needed in Washington.
Hospitals had it under control.
So your attention went to New York City.
And it was decided.
We've only got about three minutes left, unfortunately.
But to launch a 400-beds of medical and surgical capability to New York City.
And you had that done in 22 hours.
Because you did not know at the time what was going to happen in New York and how many injuries that there would be in New York.
But it became actually what turned out to be a great exercise.
It wasn't needed once you got to New York because, unfortunately, the buildings collapsed.
There were deaths instead of injuries.
And New York had it under control.
Am I pretty much describing that?
That is correct.
Yes, exactly.
Right.
So we responded to New York City.
We briefed our bosses.
We are the air force.
And so air assets are readily available.
And we were the lightest assets to respond.
We had tried to contact New York City to find out did they need help.
And I had been working with both Washington Hospital Center and New York City on mass casualties.
And how do you plan for them?
And so not being able to get a hold of them concerned me.
And so we launched our fleet.
And in less than 24 hours, we had those 400-beds of medical and surgical capability at an air base right outside New York City.
Called McGuire Air Force Base.
As it turns out, we weren't needed.
We came back.
But only for a short time because those same people deployed immediately in support of the ongoing war that occurred in Afghanistan.
In a minute and a half, can you describe your job as director of Homeland Security at the Health Science Center?
Yes.
I am very privileged to work for Dr. Nancy Dickie.
She has asked me to do the same thing I did in the military.
And that is look around corners.
And figure out how can we prepare our state better, how can we prepare our nation better.
What are the ongoing issues and come back casually care that I was involved with for so long?
And that is really what I do here.
The highlight of that was 2005 when we had an opportunity stand up at contingency hospital in our large annual hospital.
And we took care of 650 people that had been evacuated for Hurricane Rita.
And so the same things that I have worked on throughout my whole career now apply to us today as we work a whole variety of different ways.
Both at the state and at the national level.
So that is what she has asked me to do.
That is what I have continued to do.
And I absolutely love it.
And you have been here since 2002.
You came here right about a month before you officially retired from the United States Air Force.
That is correct.
It has been an incredible two episodes and we thank you for your service.
And thank you for just an incredible story and what you continue to do for our country and our university.
Well thank you.
It is a real privilege.
All right. Thank you General.
Over the last two veterans of the valleys we have tried to capture the essence of this fascinating career of Lieutenant General P.K. Carlton.
In fact, it would take many, many hours to tell the whole story.
General Carlton and his wife Jan have four grown children.
We thank him and salute him for his service.
I am Tom Turby-Vale.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
Thank you.